welcome to the first part of the
ultimate html and css series in this
series i'm going to take you on a
journey and teach you all the skills you
need to build fast and beautiful
websites that look great on all kinds of
devices i'm assuming you know nothing
about html or css i want to learn
everything from scratch
so in the first part of this series
we're going to talk about the
fundamentals of web development with
html and css in the second part we'll
explore the advanced concepts and in the
third part we'll put everything together
and build a beautiful responsive and
blazingly fast website for an imaginary
cloud hosting company called mashify if
you want to play with this website just
head over to mashify.com and see it for
yourself this is what you're going to
build in this series i'm ash hamadani
and i've taught millions of people how
to code or how to become professional
software engineers through my coding
school and youtube channel if you're new
here be sure to subscribe as we upload
new videos all the time now let's jump
in and get started
[Music]
all right let's talk about the tools you
need to take this course for the starter
you need a code editor there's so many
code editors out there like visual
studio code or vs code sublime text adam
and so on in this course i'm going to
use vs code along with a few extensions
for starting a web server and formatting
our code you're welcome to use your
favorite code editor if you know what
you're doing but otherwise head over to
code.visualstudio.com
and download the latest version of vs
code
now here inside vs code we're going to
install a couple of extensions
so let's open the extensions panel
and search for
preview
here's the extension we're going to
install prettier code formatter with
this extension we can format our code
and make it pretty this is a very
popular extension as you can see it's
been downloaded more than 9 million
times
so over here you're going to have an
install button just click it and you're
done
next we're going to install
another extension called live server
with this we can launch our website
inside a development web server again
this is a very popular extension it's
been downloaded almost 8 million times
now in addition to these we're going to
use a browser to view and test our web
pages again you can use your favorite
browser but in this course i'm going to
use google chrome and i encourage you to
use the same browser so you can easily
follow the course
we're going to start our web development
journey here in every section you will
learn something new about web
development and by the end of this
course you will put all of this together
to build a beautiful web page
in this section we're going to talk
about the fundamentals of web
development you'll learn the languages
and tools used in web development as
well as the key concepts and vocabulary
such as url http gum and so on we're
also going to talk about how websites
work so you will understand what exactly
happens under the hood when you use your
browser to visit a website you will also
learn how to inspect network traffic
using chrome dev tools which is a very
powerful tool used by front-end
developers
we'll also talk about the basics of html
and css and validating web pages which
is something a lot of developers miss
this is going to be an awesome journey
so let's jump in and get started
[Music]
this course is your first step towards
becoming a web developer so let me give
you a simple roadmap to know where you
are and where you should go next every
website has two parts a front end and a
backhand the front end is the part that
you see in your browser and interact
with all the visual aspects the back end
is the part that powers the front end
it's behind the scenes and is mainly
about storing data in databases and
providing it to the front end
so web development jobs fall into three
main categories front-end development
back-end development and full-stack
development which involves both
front-end and back-end development
front-end developers use html css and
javascript to build front-ends back-end
developers have different sets of tools
available to them which is outside the
scope of this course so let's talk about
html css and javascript
html is short for hypertext markup
language i know it's a mouthful but
basically we use html to define the
building blocks of our web pages
css is short for cascading stylesheet
and is used for styling web pages and
making them beautiful javascript is used
for adding functionality to web pages
let me give you an analogy think of a
building a building in the real world is
like a web page on the internet it has a
skeleton or structure
it can have pretty walls windows and
tiles and it can have certain
functionality for example when we press
the elevator button it comes to pick us
up
here's a real example let's say we want
to build a website like twitter for each
tweet we want to have a layout like this
so first we use html to define all the
building blocks of this layout what are
these building blocks here
an image some text indicating the user's
twitter handle another block of text
containing the message and three icons
for commenting retweeting and liking the
tweet
we use html to add these building blocks
to our web page then we use css to give
it visual effects for example with css
we can make the font bold we can make
our image round we can add some padding
around here
we can change the color of these icons
and define their look when we hover over
them so css is all about aesthetics or
visual effects with css we can also
create beautiful animations now most web
pages these days are interactive they
respond to our actions like clicks and
scrolls this is where javascript comes
in with javascript we can add
functionality or behavior to our web
pages for example we can like your tweet
so javascript is a programming language
while html and css are not meaning we
cannot use them to tell computers what
to do we use them to define the building
blocks of our web pages and style them
every webpage you have seen on our
internet is built with these three
languages so the better you learn and
understand these languages and their
features the better you will be at
front-end development
so your front-end development journey
starts with html and css i would say if
you spend three to five hours every day
studying and coding you should be able
to have a reasonable understanding of
these two languages in about a month or
a month and a half once you learn these
languages then you need to learn
javascript i have a separate series for
learning javascript so after finishing
this series you may want to enroll in
that series i would say learning
javascript would probably take another
six weeks of your time of course you're
not going to be a javascript expert in
just six weeks but you will have a
reasonable understanding of it and you
will learn more as you work on different
projects
so the first three months is all about
the fundamentals
now building websites often include a
bunch of repetitive tasks this is where
front-end frameworks and libraries come
in a framework or a library comes with a
lot of code that we can reuse in our
websites so they help us get the job
done faster that's why a lot of
companies these days use one of these
popular frameworks like react angular or
vue
now technically react is not a framework
it's a library but subtle distinction on
site all these tools serve the same
purpose they help us build applications
faster
now you don't need to learn all of these
to get started different companies use
different tools for different projects
so as you move from one project to
another you may want to learn about the
other tools if you're starting out just
focus on react because it's the most
popular tool in this space
once you learn react you can always
learn the other tools if needed for
react you would probably need one to two
months again i have a comprehensive
course on react more than 40 000 people
have taken this course and loved it
alright what's the next step version
control systems we use a version control
system to keep track of our project
history and work collaboratively with
others there are many version control
systems out there like git subversion
mercurial and so on but git is the most
popular tool in this space and is used
in more than 70 of software companies
that's why you'll see it in almost every
job description i would say you would
probably need two weeks for learning git
and again i have a comprehensive course
for you so these are the essential
skills that every front-end developer
must have you'll see these listed on
almost every job description now
different jobs require other skills but
these skills vary from one company to
another so you can learn these
additional things in the future or on
the job for now just focus on these four
skills or four steps remember less is
more don't try to learn too many things
quickly you won't learn anything you'll
just waste your time
alright that's your roadmap next we're
going to talk about how the web works
[Music]
have you ever wondered how the web works
in this lesson i'm going to tell you
exactly what happens the moment you type
the address of a website into your
browser and hit enter
as part of this we're going to talk
about a few important concepts and terms
that you need to know as a web developer
so let's say we launch our browser and
head over to a website like
codewithmosh.com
now this address that we have in the
browser address bar is called a url
which is short for uniform resource
locator basically it's a way to locate a
resource on the internet resources can
be web pages also called html documents
they can be images video files fonts and
so on so we type the url of a website
and hit enter what happens now well
there are two pieces involved here the
browser also called the client and the
computer or computers that host our
target website we refer to these as web
servers or servers for short this is
what we call the client server model the
client requests a service the server
provides the service
so our browser sends a message to the
server and says hey give me the home
page of this website this is kind of
similar to how you send your friend a
text message you can think of your phone
as the client sending the message and
your friend's phone as the server
receiving the message now back to our
example this message is formatted based
on a protocol called http or hypertext
transfer protocol you've probably
noticed it before but never know what it
is in simple terms http is a language
that clients and servers use to talk to
each other it's not a programming
language it's just a plain textual
language for communicating over the
internet we also have https which is
http with encryption so the messages
exchange between the client and the
server are encrypted here is a
simplified example of an http message
with this message the browser tells the
server what it's looking for
so on the first line it says that it
wants to get a page or a file called
index.html using http version 1.1
index.html often represents the home
page of websites on the second line we
can see the host that is
codewithmosh.com and on the third line
we can see the language that the client
can accept in this case english
now don't worry about memorizing any of
this all i want you to understand here
is that this message is structured based
on the http protocol that clients and
servers understand so the server
receives this message it figures out
what the client is asking and then it
will send a message back to the client
the first message is called an http
request and the second message is called
an http response every data exchange
using the http protocol involves two
messages a request and a response
now what is in the response here's a
simplified example
on the first line we see the version of
http protocol used followed by a number
which is the status code
200 means successful or okay
right below that we can see the date and
time of the response
next we can see the type of content the
server is sending back to the client in
this case text
html and after that we can see the html
code or the html document that
represents the home page of
codewithmosh.com of course the actual
html code is way longer now as the
browser reads this html document it
constructs what we call a dom or a
document object model don't let this
fancy name scare you this is a model
that represents the object or elements
in our html document what are these
elements all the building blocks of our
page like paragraphs of text images
links and other stuff you will see this
in action in the next lesson
now as the browser is reading this html
document that is returned from the
server it discovers references to other
resources in this document like images
fonts and other stuff each of these
resources has an address or a url so for
each resource the browser sends a
separate http request to the server to
fetch that resource many of these http
requests are set in parallel so we can
see the page as quickly as possible once
the browser has all the necessary
resources it will render the html
document rendering an html document
means displaying it it's a fancy
technical term we use often
so in a nutshell our browser sends an
http request to the server and receives
an http response this http response
contains an html document the browser
reads that html document to construct a
document object model and render the
page
in the next lesson i'm going to show you
all of these steps in action
[Music]
all right let's see http requests and
responses in action
so open up chrome and head over to
google.com now we need to access chrome
dev tools this is a very powerful tool
used by frontend developers so on the
top we go to view
developer
developer tools now look at the shortcut
on mac it's alt or option command and i
on windows is obviously different but
remember the shortcut because it's much
faster to access the devtools via the
keyboard
so
here's the dev tools the first time you
see it it might appear a bit
intimidating but trust me it's much
easier than you think throughout the
course you're going to learn more about
the dev tools so here we have a few
different tabs elements console sources
network and so on in this demo we're
going to go to the network tab so we can
inspect the network traffic to and from
google.com
now by default devtools is docked to the
bottom of the screen we can dock it to
the left to the right or undock it as a
separate window so over here
we can dock it to the left side
a lot of frontend developers like this
layout so they put devtools on the left
side and they have their website on the
right side now in this demo i'm going to
undock it as a separate window so we
have more space to work with
so
let's undock it
good
now we need to refresh our website as
you can see over here on match we can
press command on r on windows is
probably control and r
alternatively we can go back to this
window
and press the refresh button now
back to the dev tools look at all these
items over here these are the http
requests that are sent from our browser
to google.com
as you can see
there are totally
45 requests and here's the amount of
data transferred over the network so in
this case just over 94 kilobytes now
look at the first item in this list this
is the first http request that chrome
sent to google.com
as you can see
with this request the browser wanted to
get a document
and the status of this request is 200
which means okay over here you can see
the amount of data transferred over the
network for this request and the time it
took to get the response now if we click
on this request
we can see more details about it so here
on the headers tab we can see all the
headers of our request and response
so here are some general headers like
request url request method which is get
status code that is 200 we talked about
it remote address this is the new make
representation of google.com
now down below we have response editors
there are so many headers here you don't
have to worry about them but as an
example look at content type we talked
about this in the previous lesson so the
type of this response is text
html below that we have the date and
time of the response
now if we click on the preview tab
we can see a preview of the html
document that is returned from the
server so this is the home page of
google
now in this html document we have
references to other resources like
images fonts and so on so all these
subsequent requests are sent to download
those resources so right below the first
request we have a request for
downloading a png or an image file
here's another request for getting
another image we have two requests for
getting two different fonts and so on
now we can easily filter this list so
let's click on the filter icon here
by default we see all requests but we
can filter by request type for example
we can select doc to see requests for
downloading html documents or font
to see the requests that were sent to
download fonts and so on next i'm going
to show you how to create your first
html document
[Music]
alright first things first here on your
desktop or anywhere on your computer
right click and create a new folder i'm
going to call this html but we could
call it anything
now let's go back to vs code
and open the explorer panel
then we go to open folder
and open the folder that we just created
good now this folder is currently empty
so let's add a new file here called
index.html
as i told you before index.html often
represents the home page of websites so
let's go with that
now we can close the explorer panel by
pressing command and b on mac or control
and b on windows
good
now the first thing we need to do here
is to tell the browser that this is an
html5 document
so we type a left angle bracket
now look at this suggestion list the
first item here is doctype or document
type let's press enter or tab
vs code generated this piece of code for
us
so with this line of code we can tell
browsers that this is an html5 document
this line of code here is called doctype
declaration in the previous versions of
html our doctype declaration was so long
it was so messy but html5 solved this
problem so all we have to type is
doctype html and by the way html is not
a case sensitive language which means
it's not sensitive to uppercase and
lowercase letters but conventionally
speaking we type everything in lowercase
except doctype this is just a convention
we could type this in lowercase and
that's perfectly fine
so let's revert it back
now right after this we need to use our
html elements to define the structure of
this web page
the first element we're going to use is
the html element so we type html and
then press tab or enter
once again vscode generated this piece
of code for us
so what we have here on the left side is
called the opening tag
and
what we have on the right side is the
closing tag so most html elements have
an opening and a closing tag but there
are exceptions as i'm going to show you
later in this video
now inside this element we're going to
add additional elements now because i
don't want to type everything in one
line i'm going to press enter
that's better now here we're going to
add two elements head and body so once
again we type head press tab good
and then body
we use the head element to give browser
information about this page for example
here we can use the title element
to specify the title of this page that
appears in the browser over here so
let's type my first web page
now let's save the changes by pressing
command and s on mac or ctrl and s on
windows
good now before going any further let's
right click somewhere
and go to open with live server so we're
going to open this page using the
development server that we just
installed
okay
all right take a look so our page is
currently empty because we haven't added
any elements inside this page and over
here we can see the title that we just
typed my first web page
now look at the url or address of this
page we have 127.0.0.1
this number or this ip address
represents the local computer it's
globally known so everybody knows
127.0.0.1
references the current computer
after that we have a colon
and then we have
the port number on which our web server
is listening so our web server is
waiting for http requests on this port
okay
then we have a forward slash followed by
the name of our file
index.html
now back to vs code
inside the body element we're going to
add elements that would appear on our
page
so let's say we want to display a tweet
what elements do we need here an image
and some text elements so we type img
short for image and then press tab
here's our image element now this image
element is different from the other
elements we have created so far can you
tell the differences
there are two differences here the first
difference is that here we don't have a
closing tag we only have an opening tag
because the image element cannot have
any child elements that's the reason now
in the previous versions of html we used
to add a forward slash here and this
represents a self-closing tag but we
don't have to do this in html5 so i'm
going to keep the code simpler
now here we have
two attributes source and alt with these
attributes we can supply additional
information about an element
so we use the source element to specify
the path to our image
so let's open up the explorer panel one
more time by pressing command and b on
mac or control and b on windows
here i'm going to create a new folder
called images
now for this demo i'm going to use my
own image which you can also download
right below this video but you can use
any image that you want
so here's my image i'm going to drop it
onto the images folder
it's right here okay
now let's close this window
good
so where is this image
relative to our index.html file
it's inside the images folder right
so here in double quotes we type images
slash
mosh.jpg
now vs code is suggesting this name so
we can press tab to complete the code
beautiful
now alt is short for alternative text
and we use this attribute to give the
browser some text to display in case the
image cannot be displayed we'll talk
about this in more detail in the future
so for now i'm going to delete this
attribute
good
now after the image we're going to add a
text element so we type p that is short
for paragraph tab
and here we can type my twitter handle
so at marsh hammondi
after that we're going to add another
text element
and here we can type the body of our
tweet so
i love to
teach you html
perfect
save the changes
now back in the browser
our page refreshed automatically this is
one of the beauties of live server so we
don't have to manually refresh the page
every time we make changes
now look at what we have here so we have
my image and right below that we have
two text elements take a look
unfortunately they're not very visible
obviously this doesn't look like a tweet
because we haven't applied css yet as i
told you before we use html to define
the structure or the building block of
our web pages in the next lesson i'm
going to show you how to apply css so
our page looks kind of like a real tweet
[Music]
all right now let's see how we can use
css to improve the look and feel of this
page
look at our head element currently we
have a single element inside the head
element that is our title element right
now after the title we're going to add
another element called style
this is where we're going to write our
css code
so in between style tags we're going to
write a bunch of css rules first we're
going to work
on this image our image is currently too
big so let's make it a bit smaller
back to vs code
over here
we're going to type img to reference our
image element then we type a pair of
curly braces
and inside the braces we write one or
more css declarations
each declaration contains a property and
a value so here we can set the width
property to let's say 100 pixels
so we type the property colon and then
the value and then we terminate this
line using a semicolon so we can write
multiple css declarations
now let's save the changes
back in the browser our image looks
smaller that's a lot better
but look at the edges the edges are so
sharp i would like to make them a bit
round so they appear softer now back to
our rule
here we're going to set
the border dash radius property to let's
say 10 pixels
now don't worry about memorizing any of
these properties we're going to go over
them several times throughout the course
in this lesson i just want you to get a
sense of what it's like to use css okay
so save the changes
now look the edges are round and look
softer now let me show you a trick
if we set border radius to a value that
is half of the width we'll get a round
image so
i'm going to set this to 50 pixels
and here's the result that's a lot
better
now our elements are stacked vertically
i want the image to be pushed to the
left side so
let's set the float property to left
this will push the image element to the
left side of our text element take a
look
so
that's a lot better but our image is so
close to the text i want to add some
space after the image so
here we use another property called
margin dash right
we can set it to 10 pixels
save and
that's a lot better
now let's make the username bold so
we're going to repeat one more time this
time we're going to apply a rule
to our paragraph element
so here we're going to set the font dash
weight property to
bolt
take a look
see what happened both our text elements
are bold but what if you want to apply
this style only to the username
well we have to separate these two
paragraph elements so i'm going to give
the first paragraph element an attribute
called class
so class equals double quotes
class is short for classification and we
can use this attribute to put this
element inside a different class or a
different category just like the
products in a supermarket in a
supermarket we have products in
different categories right
so i'm going to put this paragraph
element inside a class or inside a
category called username
and then
i'm going to change this rule
so
this rule is currently applied to all
paragraph elements but i want it to be
applied only to paragraph elements with
the username class so right after p we
type dot username
now we can also remove p
and this rule will apply to all elements
that have the username class whether
there are paragraph elements or other
types of elements okay
now save the changes and take a look so
that's a lot better
this is css in action as you can see css
has a different syntax or a different
grammar than html throughout the rest of
the course you're going to learn both
these languages in detail next i'm going
to show you how to format your code
using prettier
hey guys mosh here i just wanted to let
you know that this video you've been
watching is the first hour of my
ultimate html and css series so after
you watch this video if you want to
learn more from me you can enroll in the
full course which is about 13 hours long
and covers everything you need to know
to build professional quality websites
with html and css it also includes
summary notes exercises a real project a
certificate of accomplish and you can
add your resume and a 30-day money-back
guarantee to get a refund if you are not
satisfied so you have nothing to lose
and a lot to learn so if you're
interested i put the link in the
description box
[Music]
one thing you need to know about
browsers is that they ignore white
spaces in html and css code for example
i can put all these elements on a single
line
and everything still works let me show
you so save the changes back in the
browser we have the same result as
before because browsers don't care how
we format our code but formatting is
very important when it comes to reading
and maintaining code we want our code to
be beautiful and perfectly formatted
just like an article this is where we
use the prettier plugin with prettier we
can format our code in a consistent
fashion this is super important when
you're part of a team because different
people have different ways of formatting
their code but if everyone on the team
uses the prettier plugin the code will
be consistently formatted so let me show
you how to use preview
on the top we go to the view menu
look at the shortcut for the command
palette on mac it's shift command and p
on windows it's probably shift control
mp
so let's bring up the command panel and
here we search for
format document now we press enter
we get this message saying there are
multiple formatters for html files
select the default formatter to continue
the reason we're getting this message is
that vs code by default comes with a
formatter for formatting html files but
we have installed prettier which is a
separate formatter
so let's go to configure
and tell vs go to use prettier to format
html and css files
okay
now prettier formatting my code so none
of those elements are on the same line
this is a lot better but let me show you
a trick we don't want to format our code
every time we make a change
so we can configure vs code to
automatically format the code the moment
we save the changes so on the top let's
go to the code menu then preferences and
settings
like here search for format and save
here's the setting let's enable this
setting
now
every time we save the changes vs code
automatically formats our code using
prettier
[Music]
we talked about the dom or document
object model i told you that when the
browser reads the html document that is
returned from the server it constructs a
document object model now let me show
you this document object model in action
so once again we're going to use chrome
dev tools the shortcut on mac is shift
command and i on windows is probably
shift control and i i'm not really sure
so let's open up dev tools
now in this lesson we're going to look
at the elements tab
now what we have here on the left side
is our document object model so we see
the same elements that we created
earlier in the course we have the html
element head body and so on but we have
some additional elements that are
injected by live server for example we
have the script element and two divs
don't worry about these these are purely
used by live server so it automatically
reloads our page now we can hover over
any of these elements and you can see
that element highlighted on the screen
now we can click an element
and on the right side we can see the
styles applied to this element so look
at the styles we defined for the image
element
with border radius and so on we can
enable or disable these styles so we can
disable the width property and now our
image is big
we can bring it back we can also change
its value so we can set it to let's say
50 pixels
now our image is smaller
we can use the up and down arrows
to change this value this is pretty
handy so a lot of front-end developers
use devtools to play with these styles
and get the look they want once they
figure out the exact styles and their
values then they apply them in the code
now one more thing
over here we can see where these styles
have been applied so
in index.html on line six we can click
on this link and this takes us to the
exact line of code where
we wrote that style now we are currently
on the sources tab so we can go back to
elements and inspect other elements
so this is the basics of inspecting
elements using devtools we're going to
talk about this in more detail in the
future
[Music]
the last thing we're going to cover in
this section is validation
so as we write code we may run into
problems if you have a typo in our code
or don't use the right syntax or grammar
our web pages may not look as expected
in these situations we can use a
validator to identify the potential
errors in our code now currently we
don't have any problems on this web page
it looks perfectly fine to me but let's
run it by the standard html validator so
we go to validator.w3.org
this is a standard markup validation
service we have three methods for
validating our html markup we can
validate by an address if our website is
live on our internet but this doesn't
work for us because our website is
currently hosted locally in our
development server so this ip address
that we have over here
127.0.0.1 this is a local ip address so
no one else can access our website
so here we have two other methods we can
validate by file upload or by direct
input
in this case i'm going to go with file
upload
so let's upload our
index.html file and check
so look we have one warning and two
errors the warning is saying that we
haven't added the lang or language
attribute to the html start tag this is
a common best practice because with this
we can tell search engines what is the
language of this webpage so they can do
a better job at displaying the results
this is very easy to fix so here's our
html tag we're going to add the lang
attribute and set it to en which is
short for english
now what is next
we have an error saying the character
encoding was not declared don't worry
about this we'll talk about this in the
next section so let's look at the second
error
it's saying that an image element must
have an alt attribute so earlier we had
this auth attribute i told you that we
use the alt attribute to provide a
description for our image
so if the image cannot be displayed the
alternative text will be displayed again
we're going to talk about the alt
attribute in more detail in the future
so back to our code let's fix this error
real quick here's our image tag
let's add the auto attribute
and for the description i'm going to say
an image of mosh hammer daddy
now save the changes
let's re-upload the file and validate it
one more time
okay this time we have only a single
error and that has to do with character
encoding which we're going to talk about
in the next section
so this is all about html validation
now for css we have a different
validator
so we go to jigsaw.w3.org
css
validator now you don't have to memorize
this address simply go to google and
search for css validator
here's the first link
so
we have the same interface we can
validate our css code using an address
or by file upload or direct input
now in this case we have embedded all of
our css code inside our html markup but
as our web pages get more complex we
want to separate our css code into
separate files so our code is better
organized we'll talk about this in more
detail in the future so for now i'm
going to copy
all of our css code
and then go to the third tab
paste it over here
and validate it
so we don't have any errors everything
is perfect
so this is all about validation
validation is very important if your web
pages aren't displayed as expected
always start with a quick validation
because this can often point you in the
right direction
right that brings us to the end of this
section in the next section we're going
to explore html in more detail
[Music]
we're going to continue our web
development journey and explore html in
more detail so in this section we're
going to cover the essential html
elements you need to know to build web
pages
you will learn all the elements used for
displaying text links images lists
tables as well as container and
structural or semantic elements even if
you know the basics of html i would
still encourage you to watch this
section thoroughly because a lot of
people don't use these elements the
right way so let's jump in and get
started
[Music]
earlier in the course i told you that we
use the head section to give browsers
and search engines information about the
web page so let's explore it in a bit
more detail i'm going to start with a
blank document now let me show you a
cool trick
if we type an exclamation mark and then
press tab
we get a basic html boilerplate which
means a basic html template
so on the top we have our doctype
declaration
below that we have our html element with
the lang attribute which is a common
best practice
next we have our head section with a
bunch of elements we're going to talk
about in a second
followed by the body section so this is
a very basic html boiler plate
now what do we have in the head section
well
we have a couple of metal elements for
giving information about this web page
the first meta element is for defining
the character set what is a character
set well
computers don't understand characters
like abc and so on they only understand
numbers which are represented in the
binary format zeros and ones so using a
character set we can map a character to
a numeric value
the first character set that was
designed was the ascii character set
which is short for american standard
code for information interchange ascii
can only represent the characters in the
english language so it's very limited
so over here different character sets
have been created to represent more
characters in international languages
the character said that we use most of
the time these days is utf-8 which can
represent almost all characters in the
world
so back to our code with this meta
element we're defining the character set
used in this html document okay
now below that we have
a meta element for configuring the
viewport
the viewport is the visible area of a
web page so it is this area over here
obviously on a mobile device or on a
tablet our viewport is smaller but here
on desktop we can change the size of the
viewport by resizing the browser
so now our viewport is smaller okay
now back to our code
with this element we're defining the
initial width and
zoom factor
for the viewport we'll talk about this
in more detail in the future for now all
i want you to know is that we need this
element so our web pages look good on
all devices mobiles tablets and desktop
computers so as a best practice every
web page should have at least these two
meta elements but we have additional
meta elements let me show you so if you
type meta
in this list you can see all possible
meta elements
for example we have this element for
defining keywords on a web page so let's
select this
here we can type multiple keywords like
html comma css and so on
in the past these keywords were heavily
used for search engine optimization but
these days most search engines don't put
too much weight on these keywords but we
can still use them to define the
keywords that represent this page
we have another meta element for
defining a description for this page so
if you type meta colon desk and then
press tab or enter
here we can type a description for this
page
what we type here will appear on google
or other search engines when someone
searches for a website for example if we
search for apple here's what we get now
look at this text
what you see here
comes from this element over here so
this is the purpose of metal elements
with this metal element we can give
information about the web page
alright next we're going to talk about
the elements you need to know for
working with text
[Music]
all right now let's talk about the most
common elements for working with text
so you learn about the p or paragraph
element which we use for displaying some
text
so here i'm going to say i love to teach
you html
now sometimes we want to emphasize a
part of our text let's say the html word
here to do that we can wrap it inside an
m or emphasis element so here i type m
press tab here's the emphasis element
let's hover over it and see what the
tooltip says
it says the m element represents stress
emphasis of its content so whenever we
want to emphasize some content we can
wrap it inside the m element so in this
case i'm going to move html inside these
tags
now let's save the changes
here's what we get so by default
browsers display emphasized content in
italic but don't assume that whenever
you want to display italic content you
should use the m element because the
purpose of the m element is to emphasize
content in our html document and this
helps search engines extract important
content in our documents anything to do
with styling should be done in css for
example here we can change the default
style of emphasize element and remove
the italic let me show you so in the
head section
we add the style element
and here we define a rule for emphasized
content
we can set the color to red
and font style
to normal
now don't worry about memorizing any of
these css properties we're going to go
over them multiple times throughout the
course but let's see what happens now
that we apply these styles
so our emphasized content is displayed
in red and is no longer italic
now in the past we had an element called
i
which was short for italic
if we use this element
we get the same result as before
our content is displayed in italic
but this element is considered
deprecated because html is not meant for
styling it should only be used for
structuring content
so don't use the i element to display
content as italic okay
now we have a similar element in html
called strong
let's hover over it and see
what the tooltip says the strong element
represents strong importance seriousness
or urgency of its contents
conceptually it's kind of similar to the
emphasis element so where you should use
it really depends on your context on
your content now let's save the changes
and see what we get
so by default strong elements are
displayed as bold but once again we can
always change the styling now in the
past we had another element called b
which is short for bold so whenever we
wanted to make something bold we use
this element but once again this element
is considered deprecated because styling
should be done in css and not in html
okay
so don't use b or i elements
now i'm going to remove
this element and just add html let me
show you a cool trick
let's say we want to wrap this word with
the m element there is a shortcut for it
so on the top we go to the view menu
look at the shortcut for the command
palette on mac is shift command on p and
on windows is probably shift ctrl np
so let's select html
and then bring up the command palette
with this command palette we can execute
commands in vs code so here i'm going to
search for a command called wrap with
abbreviation that is the first command
in the list
now we press enter and here we type the
element that we want to use to wrap our
selected content in this case m
press enter done
so i didn't have to manually create an m
element and then move html inside it
it's very handy
so this is all about text now let's talk
about headings
so in html we have six heading elements
h1
we have h2
h3
h4
h5
and h6
so let's see what we get
so
heading 1 represents the most important
heading and heading 6 represents the
least important heading
now one common mistake that i see
amongst a lot of people is that they
choose these headings based on their
size so if they want to have a heading
with this size they would just use
heading 4. that is not how you're
supposed to use headings because the
size can always be changed with css it's
a matter of styling we should use these
headings to create a hierarchy so every
web page should have one and only one h1
element this heading represents what
this page is all about now nothing
happens if you have multiple h1 elements
for example
i can duplicate this line and say
heading 1 plus
now look we have two h1 elements but
this is going to confuse search engines
they're not going to figure out what
this page is really all about
so every page should have a single
h1 element so
i'm going to remove this line
now after we use h1 then we should use
h2 we should not jump to h4
so let's say on this page we're going to
have two sections one for html the other
for css so my next heading should be h2
and here we can type html
obviously below this heading we can have
some text
so i'm going to say html tutorial
our next heading should be h2 so
this is the css section
and in this section we can have some
additional text let's say css tutorial
now i'm going to delete
these four headings
so
let's take a look
so we have a hierarchy on the top we
have an h1 element below that we have
two h2 elements now let's say in this
section we're going to have two
subsections there we should use h3
elements
so
here's our html section
in this section we're going to have two
h3 elements let's say code
and exercise
now take a look
so we have a hierarchy this is how we
should use these heading elements the
better we can represent the structure of
our document using html the better
search engines can read and understand
our content
so that's all about text next we're
going to talk about displaying special
characters in html
[Music]
some characters are reserved in html and
to display them we have to use a special
notation for example let's say we want
to wrap the word html with angle
brackets see what's going to happen so i
type a left angle bracket and a right
angle bracket see what happened
vs code thought we're adding an html
element so it automatically generated
the closing tag we don't want this so
let's delete it
now back in the browser
look where is our html word it's not
here because the browser interpreted
this
as an html tag this is not what we want
we want to display this exactly as this
so to solve this problem we're going to
use html entities all these entities
start with an ampersand and end with a
semicolon in between these two
characters we type a few characters that
determine the type of the html entity so
we have an entity for displaying the
less than sign
that is l t short for less than
now let's remove this
similarly we have another html entity
for displaying the greater than sign so
we type an ampersand gt which is short
for greater than
followed by a semicolon
now back to the browser that's exactly
what we wanted perfect another common
html entity is the copyright symbol
so
at the end i'm going to type an
ampersand
copy and a semicolon
now take a look
here's our copyright symbol beautiful
now we have so many editors in html and
quite frankly you don't need to memorize
any of them in fact you're not going to
use 99 of them but in case you're
curious let me show you the complete
list
so on google search for html entities
and on this second link dev.w3.org
you can see the complete list of news
entities
so as you can see there are so many
entities and honestly i have never used
any of them the only ones i have used
are these three plus non-breaking space
let me show you what that is about so
i'm going to do this line
and generate some dummy text so we add a
paragraph element now to generate some
dummy text we type lorem
followed by the number of words we want
to generate let's say 50. tab
look this is some dummy text in latin
now let's preview it in the browser
so here's what we get
let's imagine that the last part on the
first line
and the first word on the second line
should be stick together here we have a
line break in between these two words
you want to prevent that so
i'm going to copy this word now
here in vs code let's bring up the
search panel by pressing command and f
on mac or ctrl and f on windows
now we paste this word
okay here it is we want to make sure
that these two words are always together
there is no line breaking between them
so i'm going to replace this regular
space with a non-breaking space which is
an html entity so we type an ampersand
nbsp which is short for non-breaking
space
followed by a semicolon
now take a look
so
both these words
are on the second line
so this is all about html entities next
we're going to talk about links
[Music]
almost every webpage on the internet has
links to other pages or websites to
create these links we use the anchor
element so we type a that is short for
anchor and then press tab
now every anchor element should have an
href attribute
href is short for hypertext reference i
know it's a mouthful it basically means
a url or a link so for this demo i'm
going to create a second page called
about.html and then link to it over here
so in the explorer panel
let's add a new page
called about.html
now here we're going to create a basic
html boilerplate remember how to do that
we type an exclamation mark and then
press tab
that's it beautiful
now back to index.html
here we can use a relative or an
absolute url what do you mean by that
well a relative url starts from the
current page so currently we are on
index.html and we want to go to
about.html
now currently both these pages are in
the same folder
so we can type a relative url to
about.html like this about html
that's a relative url now what if
about.html was in a different folder so
let's add a new folder to our project
called company
and then move about
to this folder
now where is about.html relative to the
current page it's inside the company
folder right so here we type company
slash about.html
this is a relative url
now let's give this link a text i'm
going to say about me so we type our
text inside the anchor element okay
save the changes
back to the browser here's our link
click
and we're currently on the about page
which is empty beautiful
now back to our homepage
instead of a text we can also use an
image so i'm going to delete about me
and add an image element so img tab once
again here we can type a relative url to
our target image so i'm going to go with
images
mosh.jpg now save
take a look
obviously this image is way too big we
can always use css to resize it but that
aside look at the mouse icon
when we hover over this image it changed
to a hand to indicate that this image is
clickable okay
now back to our code to keep things
simple i'm going to get rid of this
image and
get back
to our text about me
now let's go to the about page and add a
link back to the home page so
over here
we're going to add
an anchor element
what should we type for the href
attribute well currently we are inside
the company folder we have to go one
level up so we can access index.html
right
to do that we type double periods and a
forward slash with this we can go one
level up now at this level which is the
root of our website we have the company
folder the images folder and index.html
so we can reference index.html
and for the text we're going to say home
page again this is another example of a
relative url because it starts from the
current page and goes somewhere else now
if you're inside a deeply nested folder
structure we might have to go multiple
levels up so double period and a forward
slash then we repeat and repeat with
this we can go three levels up
now as you can see urls like this kind
of look messy they look hard to read in
those cases we can use an absolute url
so we start with a forward slash and
this represents the root of our website
at this level we have access to
index.html
so this is an absolute url okay
now back to index.html
here we are linking to an html document
but we can also link to non-html
documents like images pdfs powerpoints
and so on so let's add a link to my
image so for the href i'm going to say
images slash mosh.jpg
and for the text i'm going to say my
photo
save
take a look so here's our second link
click
my image is displayed in the browser
but what if i want to prompt the user to
download it that's very easy
we're going to add the download
attribute to our anchor element so we
type download press enter now this
attribute doesn't have a value so we can
remove the double quotes and the equal
sign
so we just add the attribute name now
save
back to the browser
we go back
here we have to manually refresh the
page because the live server only
refreshes the current page now
previously we were on my image so that
was the url that live server refreshed
so here we refresh
to get the latest changes now when i
click on this link instead of seeing my
image we're going to see my image
getting downloaded take a look click
and here's my image beautiful
now we can also link to other parts of
this page so
let's create two sections with a lot of
text so i'm going to add an h2 element
and of course i missed the h1 but let's
not worry about it for this h2 we're
going to say html
and below that we're going to add some
dummy text with 200 words so paragraph
lorem 200
good
now right after that we're going to add
another h2 for the css section
with some more text
okay
let's save the changes
take a look
as you can see the css section is below
default so we have to scroll down to see
what we can do here
is on the top we can add a link to the
css section so when the user clicks on
that they will immediately jump to the
css section that is very easy
so here's the css section first we have
to give this element a unique identifier
just like everyone in the real world can
have a unique identifier like a driver's
license or a password every element on a
page can also have a unique identifier
so here i'm going to set the id
attribute to
css
or we can use a more descriptive name
like section
dash css
the name doesn't really matter here what
matters is that we're defining what is
called a fragment or a place on this
page now we're going to add a link to
this fragment so on the top
let's add another anchor element
now for the href we're going to type
the pound sign followed by the name of
our fragment which is section
css
and for the text we're going to say css
now
back to the browser take a look i'm
going to click on this
we immediately jump to the css section
beautiful now a lot of websites like
this also have a link that helps you
jump to the top of the page let's see
how we can create that
so after the css section
i'm going to add
another anchor element
now for the href i'm going to use
an empty fragment so we just type a
pound sign without an identifier
and then we say jump to top
take a look so
here's our link click and now we're on
top of the page now let's see how we can
link to external websites
so let's add another anchor element to
link to google
now what should we type here well
google.com is a different website so
here we cannot use a relative url we
have to use an absolute url but if you
start with a forward slash we're
referencing the root of our website but
in this case we want to go to a
different website how can we do that
well we have to start with the protocol
so https colon
to forward slashes google.com
now let's type google
and test our page
click
we're on google beautiful now sometimes
when linking to external website we want
that link to open in a new browser
window or a new tab let me show you how
to do that
so
here's our anchor
we set the target attribute to underline
blank
save
now back to the homepage once again we
have to manually refresh to get the
latest changes
okay
now when i click on google
you see a new tab beautiful and one last
thing
we can also link to emails so i'm going
to add an anchor
and for href i'm going to say mailto
colon
programming
with mosh gmail.com
email me
save the changes
now back to our page when i click on
this link my mail client will open and
my email address will be pre-populated
take a look so click
and here's my mail client
so this is all about links now one last
thing before we finish this lesson what
is the difference between a link and a
hyperlink well a link is just an address
a url the location of the target page a
hyperlink is the element that the user
can click on to navigate to that target
page that is the difference between a
link and a hyperlink but quite often
these terms are used interchangeably
alright we're done with this lesson next
we're going to talk about images
[Music]
all right now let's talk about embedding
images in a bit more detail for this
lesson i'm going to grab an image from
unsplash.com which is where we can find
a lot of beautiful and freely usable
images
so let's search for coffee
there are tons of coffee pictures here
i'm going to grab
this picture
we can download it for free
now look this image comes in different
sizes small medium and large for now
we're going to grab this image in a
small size but in the future we're going
to talk about embedding images at
different sizes depending on the device
so on mobile devices we want to serve a
smaller image and on desktop computers
we want to serve a larger image for now
let's not worry about these complexities
we'll have a conflict section on this
topic later on
so let's download the small image
now it says say thank you to nathan
thanks nathan this is a beautiful
picture you have done a great job
now i'm going to drag and drop this
image onto the images folder
and then rename it to coffee
we want to give it a descriptive name
this is a small search engine
optimization tip when we provide
descriptive names for our images search
engines can better understand and index
our pages okay
so here's our image now
let's add an image element
we set the source to images
coffee.jpg
now what about the alt attribute well i
briefly mentioned that we use this
attribute to provide textual description
of the image it's not compulsory but is
highly recommended for a number of
reasons the first reason is to make our
page accessible to visually impaired
people these people use a screen reader
to read the web out to them so with this
alternative text we can tell them what
we are showing on the page and that
means we should write a good meaningful
description here like a coffee mug
on a table
don't write something like image or
image one that is pointless now the
second benefit of providing an
alternative text is that we help search
engines read this text and understand
what we're providing here and there's
one more benefit
if this image cannot be loaded for some
reason the alternative text is shown let
me show you what i mean so i'm going to
add a typo here
now
back to the browser look
the image is not loaded but we see the
alternative text this can also happen if
there is a network connectivity issue if
the user gets disconnected they can
still see the alternative text
so let's remove the typo now let's talk
about sizing images as i told you before
we can use css to resize our images so
here in the head section
let's add
a style element
and apply a rule to our image
now this rule is applied to all images
on the page this is probably not
something we want to do in the real
world scenario in a real-world scenario
we want to apply a class to this element
and then define rules for that class
we'll talk about this in more detail in
the future
so for now let's give this image a width
of 200 pixels and a height of 200 pixels
now
there's a tiny problem in our image can
you tell
our image is kind of squashed here's the
reason
we're dealing with a rectangular image
look this is a rectangular image but
we're converting it to a square image
now look at the shape of this coffee mug
it's kind of round right like compared
with
what we have over here our image is
vertically squashed let me show you
another way to verify this
we can right click on the image
and then go to inspect
this opens chrome devtools and selects
our image in the dom
now on the right side we can see the
styles that we applied to this element
now i'm going to disable the height
property
and i want you to pay close attention to
the image and see how the shape changes
so look
now the coffee mug is more round but if
i applied the height property
it becomes squashed so how can we solve
this problem well we have a new property
in css called object fit
so here we can set object fit to one of
these values most of the time we use
cover so the image covers its containing
box what is this containing box well
first let me set this to cover
here we have this image element right
conceptually there is a box around every
element in an html document we don't see
this box but the browser uses that box
to figure out how the page should be
displayed so here we have a box with
this dimension 200x200 and in this box
we're trying to insert this image right
now when we set object fit to cover
our image will get resized and
potentially cropped so it covers the
entire containing box let's verify this
so save the changes and back in the
browser look our coffee mug is round but
if i disable the object fit property
it gets squashed again
so object fit is a very useful property
now we can always play with all possible
values over here so i'm going to select
this deleted
now using the up and down arrows
we can go through this list and see the
impact of every value now i'm not going
to go over all these values and explain
what they mean this is pointless you can
always figure them out on your own just
remember that most of the time
we use cover so the image covers the
entire containing box
alright this is all about the images for
now next we're going to talk about video
and audio
hey guys mosh here i just wanted to let
you know that this video you've been
watching is the first hour of my
ultimate html and css series so after
you watch this video if you want to
learn more from me you can enroll in the
full course which is about 13 hours long
and covers everything you need to know
to build professional quality websites
with html and css it also includes
summary notes exercises a real project a
certificate of accomplish and you can
add your resume and a 30 day money back
guarantee to get a refund if you're not
satisfied so you have nothing to lose
and a lot to learn so if you're
interested i put the link in the
description box